=head1 NAME

qemu-doc - QEMU Emulator User Documentation

=head1 SYNOPSIS

usage: qemu [options] [disk_image]

=head1 DESCRIPTION


The QEMU PC System emulator simulates the
following peripherals:


=over 4


=item -

i440FX host PCI bridge and PIIX3 PCI to ISA bridge

=item -

Cirrus CLGD 5446 PCI VGA card or dummy VGA card with Bochs VESA
extensions (hardware level, including all non standard modes).

=item -

PS/2 mouse and keyboard

=item -

2 PCI IDE interfaces with hard disk and CD-ROM support

=item -

Floppy disk

=item -

NE2000 PCI network adapters

=item -

Serial ports

=item -

Creative SoundBlaster 16 sound card

=item -

ENSONIQ AudioPCI ES1370 sound card

=item -

Adlib(OPL2) - Yamaha YM3812 compatible chip

=item -

PCI UHCI USB controller and a virtual USB hub.

=back


SMP is supported with up to 255 CPUs.

Note that adlib is only available when QEMU was configured with
-enable-adlib

QEMU uses the PC BIOS from the Bochs project and the Plex86/Bochs LGPL
VGA BIOS.

QEMU uses YM3812 emulation by Tatsuyuki Satoh.


=head1 OPTIONS

I<disk_image> is a raw hard disk image for IDE hard disk 0.

General options:

=over 4


=item B<-M machine>

Select the emulated machine (C<-M ?> for list)


=item B<-fda file>


=item B<-fdb file>

Use I<file> as floppy disk 0/1 image. You can
use the host floppy by using F</dev/fd0> as filename.


=item B<-hda file>


=item B<-hdb file>


=item B<-hdc file>


=item B<-hdd file>

Use I<file> as hard disk 0, 1, 2 or 3 image.


=item B<-cdrom file>

Use I<file> as CD-ROM image (you cannot use B<-hdc> and and
B<-cdrom> at the same time). You can use the host CD-ROM by
using F</dev/cdrom> as filename.


=item B<-boot [a|c|d|n]>

Boot on floppy (a), hard disk (c), CD-ROM (d), or Etherboot (n). Hard disk boot
is the default.


=item B<-snapshot>

Write to temporary files instead of disk image files. In this case,
the raw disk image you use is not written back. You can however force
the write back by pressing B<C-a s>.


=item B<-no-fd-bootchk>

Disable boot signature checking for floppy disks in Bochs BIOS. It may
be needed to boot from old floppy disks.


=item B<-m megs>

Set virtual RAM size to I<megs> megabytes. Default is 128 MB.


=item B<-smp n>

Simulate an SMP system with I<n> CPUs. On the PC target, up to 255
CPUs are supported.


=item B<-nographic>


Normally, QEMU uses SDL to display the VGA output. With this option,
you can totally disable graphical output so that QEMU is a simple
command line application. The emulated serial port is redirected on
the console. Therefore, you can still use QEMU to debug a Linux kernel
with a serial console.


=item B<-vnc display>


Normally, QEMU uses SDL to display the VGA output.  With this option,
you can have QEMU listen on VNC display I<display> and redirect the VGA
display over the VNC session.  It is very useful to enable the usb
tablet device when using this option (option B<-usbdevice
tablet>). When using the VNC display, you must use the B<-k>
option to set the keyboard layout if you are not using en-us.

I<display> may be in the form I<interface:d>, in which case connections
will only be allowed from I<interface> on display I<d>. Optionally,
I<interface> can be omitted.  I<display> can also be in the form
I<unix:path> where I<path> is the location of a unix socket to listen for
connections on.



=item B<-k language>


Use keyboard layout I<language> (for example C<fr> for
French). This option is only needed where it is not easy to get raw PC
keycodes (e.g. on Macs, with some X11 servers or with a VNC
display). You don't normally need to use it on PC/Linux or PC/Windows
hosts.

The available layouts are:
	
	ar  de-ch  es  fo     fr-ca  hu  ja  mk     no  pt-br  sv
	da  en-gb  et  fr     fr-ch  is  lt  nl     pl  ru     th
	de  en-us  fi  fr-be  hr     it  lv  nl-be  pt  sl     tr


The default is C<en-us>.


=item B<-audio-help>


Will show the audio subsystem help: list of drivers, tunable
parameters.


=item B<-soundhw card1,card2,... or -soundhw all>


Enable audio and selected sound hardware. Use ? to print all
available sound hardware.

	
	qemu -soundhw sb16,adlib hda
	qemu -soundhw es1370 hda
	qemu -soundhw all hda
	qemu -soundhw ?



=item B<-localtime>

Set the real time clock to local time (the default is to UTC
time). This option is needed to have correct date in MS-DOS or
Windows.


=item B<-full-screen>

Start in full screen.


=item B<-pidfile file>

Store the QEMU process PID in I<file>. It is useful if you launch QEMU
from a script.


=item B<-daemonize>

Daemonize the QEMU process after initialization.  QEMU will not detach from
standard IO until it is ready to receive connections on any of its devices.
This option is a useful way for external programs to launch QEMU without having
to cope with initialization race conditions.


=item B<-win2k-hack>

Use it when installing Windows 2000 to avoid a disk full bug. After
Windows 2000 is installed, you no longer need this option (this option
slows down the IDE transfers).


=item B<-option-rom file>

Load the contents of file as an option ROM.  This option is useful to load
things like EtherBoot.


=back


USB options:

=over 4



=item B<-usb>

Enable the USB driver (will be the default soon)


=item B<-usbdevice devname>

Add the USB device I<devname>. 

=back


Network options:


=over 4



=item B<-net nic[,vlan=n][,macaddr=addr][,model=type]>

Create a new Network Interface Card and connect it to VLAN I<n> (I<n>
= 0 is the default). The NIC is currently an NE2000 on the PC
target. Optionally, the MAC address can be changed. If no
B<-net> option is specified, a single NIC is created.
Qemu can emulate several different models of network card.  Valid values for
I<type> are C<ne2k_pci>, C<ne2k_isa>, C<rtl8139>,
C<smc91c111> and C<lance>.  Not all devices are supported on all
targets.


=item B<-net user[,vlan=n][,hostname=name]>

Use the user mode network stack which requires no administrator
priviledge to run.  B<hostname=name> can be used to specify the client
hostname reported by the builtin DHCP server.


=item B<-net tap[,vlan=n][,fd=h][,ifname=name][,script=file]>

Connect the host TAP network interface I<name> to VLAN I<n> and
use the network script I<file> to configure it. The default
network script is F</etc/qemu-ifup>. Use B<script=no> to
disable script execution. If I<name> is not
provided, the OS automatically provides one.  B<fd=h> can be
used to specify the handle of an already opened host TAP interface. Example:

	
	qemu linux.img -net nic -net tap


More complicated example (two NICs, each one connected to a TAP device)
	
	qemu linux.img -net nic,vlan=0 -net tap,vlan=0,ifname=tap0 \
	               -net nic,vlan=1 -net tap,vlan=1,ifname=tap1




=item B<-net socket[,vlan=n][,fd=h][,listen=[host]:port][,connect=host:port]>


Connect the VLAN I<n> to a remote VLAN in another QEMU virtual
machine using a TCP socket connection. If B<listen> is
specified, QEMU waits for incoming connections on I<port>
(I<host> is optional). B<connect> is used to connect to
another QEMU instance using the B<listen> option. B<fd=h>
specifies an already opened TCP socket.

Example:
	
	# launch a first QEMU instance
	qemu linux.img -net nic,macaddr=52:54:00:12:34:56 \
	               -net socket,listen=:1234
	# connect the VLAN 0 of this instance to the VLAN 0
	# of the first instance
	qemu linux.img -net nic,macaddr=52:54:00:12:34:57 \
	               -net socket,connect=127.0.0.1:1234



=item B<-net socket[,vlan=n][,fd=h][,mcast=maddr:port]>


Create a VLAN I<n> shared with another QEMU virtual
machines using a UDP multicast socket, effectively making a bus for 
every QEMU with same multicast address I<maddr> and I<port>.
NOTES:

=over 4


=item 1.

Several QEMU can be running on different hosts and share same bus (assuming 
correct multicast setup for these hosts).

=item 2.

mcast support is compatible with User Mode Linux (argument B<eth>I<N>B<=mcast>), see
E<lt>B<http://user-mode-linux.sf.net>E<gt>.

=item 3.<Use B<fd=h> to specify an already opened UDP multicast socket.>


=back


Example:
	
	# launch one QEMU instance
	qemu linux.img -net nic,macaddr=52:54:00:12:34:56 \
	               -net socket,mcast=230.0.0.1:1234
	# launch another QEMU instance on same "bus"
	qemu linux.img -net nic,macaddr=52:54:00:12:34:57 \
	               -net socket,mcast=230.0.0.1:1234
	# launch yet another QEMU instance on same "bus"
	qemu linux.img -net nic,macaddr=52:54:00:12:34:58 \
	               -net socket,mcast=230.0.0.1:1234


Example (User Mode Linux compat.):
	
	# launch QEMU instance (note mcast address selected
	# is UML's default)
	qemu linux.img -net nic,macaddr=52:54:00:12:34:56 \
	               -net socket,mcast=239.192.168.1:1102
	# launch UML
	/path/to/linux ubd0=/path/to/root_fs eth0=mcast



=item B<-net none>

Indicate that no network devices should be configured. It is used to
override the default configuration (B<-net nic -net user>) which
is activated if no B<-net> options are provided.


=item B<-tftp prefix>

When using the user mode network stack, activate a built-in TFTP
server. All filenames beginning with I<prefix> can be downloaded
from the host to the guest using a TFTP client. The TFTP client on the
guest must be configured in binary mode (use the command C<bin> of
the Unix TFTP client). The host IP address on the guest is as usual
10.0.2.2.


=item B<-smb dir>

When using the user mode network stack, activate a built-in SMB
server so that Windows OSes can access to the host files in F<dir>
transparently.

In the guest Windows OS, the line:
	
	10.0.2.4 smbserver

must be added in the file F<C:\WINDOWS\LMHOSTS> (for windows 9x/Me)
or F<C:\WINNT\SYSTEM32\DRIVERS\ETC\LMHOSTS> (Windows NT/2000).

Then F<dir> can be accessed in F<\\smbserver\qemu>.

Note that a SAMBA server must be installed on the host OS in
F</usr/sbin/smbd>. QEMU was tested successfully with smbd version
2.2.7a from the Red Hat 9 and version 3.0.10-1.fc3 from Fedora Core 3.


=item B<-redir [tcp|udp]:host-port:[guest-host]:guest-port>


When using the user mode network stack, redirect incoming TCP or UDP
connections to the host port I<host-port> to the guest
I<guest-host> on guest port I<guest-port>. If I<guest-host>
is not specified, its value is 10.0.2.15 (default address given by the
built-in DHCP server).

For example, to redirect host X11 connection from screen 1 to guest
screen 0, use the following:

	
	# on the host
	qemu -redir tcp:6001::6000 [...]
	# this host xterm should open in the guest X11 server
	xterm -display :1


To redirect telnet connections from host port 5555 to telnet port on
the guest, use the following:

	
	# on the host
	qemu -redir tcp:5555::23 [...]
	telnet localhost 5555


Then when you use on the host C<telnet localhost 5555>, you
connect to the guest telnet server.


=back


Linux boot specific: When using these options, you can use a given
Linux kernel without installing it in the disk image. It can be useful
for easier testing of various kernels.


=over 4



=item B<-kernel bzImage> 

Use I<bzImage> as kernel image.


=item B<-append cmdline> 

Use I<cmdline> as kernel command line


=item B<-initrd file>

Use I<file> as initial ram disk.


=back


Debug/Expert options:

=over 4



=item B<-serial dev>

Redirect the virtual serial port to host character device
I<dev>. The default device is C<vc> in graphical mode and
C<stdio> in non graphical mode.

This option can be used several times to simulate up to 4 serials
ports.

Use C<-serial none> to disable all serial ports.

Available character devices are:

=over 4


=item C<vc>

Virtual console

=item C<pty>

[Linux only] Pseudo TTY (a new PTY is automatically allocated)

=item C<none>

No device is allocated.

=item C<null>

void device

=item C</dev/XXX>

[Linux only] Use host tty, e.g. F</dev/ttyS0>. The host serial port
parameters are set according to the emulated ones.

=item C</dev/parportN>

[Linux only, parallel port only] Use host parallel port
I<N>. Currently only SPP parallel port features can be used.

=item C<file:filename>

Write output to filename. No character can be read.

=item C<stdio>

[Unix only] standard input/output

=item C<pipe:filename>

name pipe I<filename>

=item C<COMn>

[Windows only] Use host serial port I<n>

=item C<udp:[remote_host]:remote_port[@[src_ip]:src_port]>

This implements UDP Net Console.  When I<remote_host> or I<src_ip> are not specified they default to C<0.0.0.0>.  When not using a specifed I<src_port> a random port is automatically chosen.

If you just want a simple readonly console you can use C<netcat> or
C<nc>, by starting qemu with: C<-serial udp::4555> and nc as:
C<nc -u -l -p 4555>. Any time qemu writes something to that port it
will appear in the netconsole session.

If you plan to send characters back via netconsole or you want to stop
and start qemu a lot of times, you should have qemu use the same
source port each time by using something like C<-serial
udp::4555@4556> to qemu. Another approach is to use a patched
version of netcat which can listen to a TCP port and send and receive
characters via udp.  If you have a patched version of netcat which
activates telnet remote echo and single char transfer, then you can
use the following options to step up a netcat redirector to allow
telnet on port 5555 to access the qemu port.

=over 4


=item C<Qemu Options:>

-serial udp::4555@4556

=item C<netcat options:>

-u -P 4555 -L 0.0.0.0:4556 -t -p 5555 -I -T

=item C<telnet options:>

localhost 5555

=back




=item C<tcp:[host]:port[,server][,nowait][,nodelay]>

The TCP Net Console has two modes of operation.  It can send the serial
I/O to a location or wait for a connection from a location.  By default
the TCP Net Console is sent to I<host> at the I<port>.  If you use
the I<server> option QEMU will wait for a client socket application
to connect to the port before continuing, unless the C<nowait>
option was specified.  The C<nodelay> option disables the Nagle buffering
algoritm.  If I<host> is omitted, 0.0.0.0 is assumed. Only
one TCP connection at a time is accepted. You can use C<telnet> to
connect to the corresponding character device.

=over 4


=item C<Example to send tcp console to 192.168.0.2 port 4444>

-serial tcp:192.168.0.2:4444

=item C<Example to listen and wait on port 4444 for connection>

-serial tcp::4444,server

=item C<Example to not wait and listen on ip 192.168.0.100 port 4444>

-serial tcp:192.168.0.100:4444,server,nowait

=back



=item C<telnet:host:port[,server][,nowait][,nodelay]>

The telnet protocol is used instead of raw tcp sockets.  The options
work the same as if you had specified C<-serial tcp>.  The
difference is that the port acts like a telnet server or client using
telnet option negotiation.  This will also allow you to send the
MAGIC_SYSRQ sequence if you use a telnet that supports sending the break
sequence.  Typically in unix telnet you do it with Control-] and then
type "send break" followed by pressing the enter key.


=item C<unix:path[,server][,nowait]>

A unix domain socket is used instead of a tcp socket.  The option works the
same as if you had specified C<-serial tcp> except the unix domain socket
I<path> is used for connections.


=back



=item B<-parallel dev>

Redirect the virtual parallel port to host device I<dev> (same
devices as the serial port). On Linux hosts, F</dev/parportN> can
be used to use hardware devices connected on the corresponding host
parallel port.

This option can be used several times to simulate up to 3 parallel
ports.

Use C<-parallel none> to disable all parallel ports.


=item B<-monitor dev>

Redirect the monitor to host device I<dev> (same devices as the
serial port).
The default device is C<vc> in graphical mode and C<stdio> in
non graphical mode.


=item B<-s>

Wait gdb connection to port 1234. 

=item B<-p port>

Change gdb connection port.  I<port> can be either a decimal number
to specify a TCP port, or a host device (same devices as the serial port).

=item B<-S>

Do not start CPU at startup (you must type 'c' in the monitor).

=item B<-d>             

Output log in /tmp/qemu.log

=item B<-hdachs c,h,s,[,t]>

Force hard disk 0 physical geometry (1 E<lt>= I<c> E<lt>= 16383, 1 E<lt>=
I<h> E<lt>= 16, 1 E<lt>= I<s> E<lt>= 63) and optionally force the BIOS
translation mode (I<t>=none, lba or auto). Usually QEMU can guess
all thoses parameters. This option is useful for old MS-DOS disk
images.


=item B<-L path>

Set the directory for the BIOS, VGA BIOS and keymaps.


=item B<-std-vga>

Simulate a standard VGA card with Bochs VBE extensions (default is
Cirrus Logic GD5446 PCI VGA). If your guest OS supports the VESA 2.0
VBE extensions (e.g. Windows XP) and if you want to use high
resolution modes (E<gt>= 1280x1024x16) then you should use this option.


=item B<-no-acpi>

Disable ACPI (Advanced Configuration and Power Interface) support. Use
it if your guest OS complains about ACPI problems (PC target machine
only).


=item B<-no-reboot>

Exit instead of rebooting.


=item B<-loadvm file>

Start right away with a saved state (C<loadvm> in monitor)


=item B<-semihosting>

Enable "Angel" semihosting interface (ARM target machines only).
Note that this allows guest direct access to the host filesystem,
so should only be used with trusted guest OS.

=back



During the graphical emulation, you can use the following keys:

=over 4


=item B<Ctrl-Alt-f>

Toggle full screen


=item B<Ctrl-Alt-n>

Switch to virtual console 'n'. Standard console mappings are:

=over 4


=item I<1>

Target system display

=item I<2>

Monitor

=item I<3>

Serial port

=back



=item B<Ctrl-Alt>

Toggle mouse and keyboard grab.

=back


In the virtual consoles, you can use B<Ctrl-Up>, B<Ctrl-Down>,
B<Ctrl-PageUp> and B<Ctrl-PageDown> to move in the back log.

During emulation, if you are using the B<-nographic> option, use
B<Ctrl-a h> to get terminal commands:


=over 4


=item B<Ctrl-a h>

Print this help

=item B<Ctrl-a x>    

Exit emulator

=item B<Ctrl-a s>    

Save disk data back to file (if -snapshot)

=item B<Ctrl-a b>

Send break (magic sysrq in Linux)

=item B<Ctrl-a c>

Switch between console and monitor

=item B<Ctrl-a Ctrl-a>

Send Ctrl-a

=back


The following options are specific to the PowerPC emulation:


=over 4



=item B<-g WxH[xDEPTH]>  


Set the initial VGA graphic mode. The default is 800x600x15.


=back



The following options are specific to the Sparc emulation:


=over 4



=item B<-g WxH>


Set the initial TCX graphic mode. The default is 1024x768.


=back



=head1 SEE ALSO

The HTML documentation of QEMU for more precise information and Linux
user mode emulator invocation.

=head1 AUTHOR

Fabrice Bellard

